---
title: "Ergonomic keyboards can be fun?"
date: 2023-12-02T18:25:13-04:00
socialShare: false
draft: false
author: "Garrett Leber"
tags:
- "github"
- "github actions"
- "keyboards"
- "development"
image: /images/lumberjack.jpg
description: "My ergonomic keyboard experience and why I think you should try one"
---

I've been using ergonomic keyboards for almost exactly a year now. It started
out of curiosity and has turned into a full blown hobby. Over the past year I
ordered 4 different ergonomic keyboards. 3 of which I had to solder and flash.
I learned to touch type and have been using [colemak](https://colemak.com/)
(mod DH) since I started. I went from typing 110 WPM on qwerty with what I call
"gaming form" to about 100 WPM on colemak with proper form. This might sound
like a downgrade, but I can now type for hours without any pain, and I can type
MUCH faster when it comes to writing code. I've also learned a lot about the
keyboard community and have thoroughly enjoyed the ability to adapt my keymap
to my needs.

The keyboards I've bought/built so far are:

- [Keebio Iris](https://keeb.io/collections/iris-split-ergonomic-keyboard)
- Corne (42 key, fully wireless)
- Lumberjack (my favorite for looks)
- Sofle v2 choc (my current daily driver, favorite for typing)

I'd like to just capture some of my thoughts on each of these keyboards and
what led me to each of them.

## Keebio Iris

![Iris](/images/iris.jpg)

The Iris was my first split keyboard. I had been using a pretty standard
mechanical keyboard for 5 years or so prior to this (TKL). I never really had
any issues with it, but I stumbled upon the ergo community and was intrigued. I
decided to order the Iris because I didn't trust myself to assemble a kit yet.
I was also interested in the hotswap sockets. I ordered the kit with the Durock
Sunflower switches (Tactile) and some DSA keycaps from Amazon. I was pretty
excited when it arrived and I got to work putting it together. I was able to
get it assembled in less than 30 minutes and I was typing on it shortly after.

### Initial Learning Curve

I immediately noticed that this was going to be a rough ride. I had to look
down at the keyboard to type anything. I was typing at about 20 WPM and it was
very frustrating. Since I was already having such a hard time, and I didn't
want to bring any of my bad habits from QWERTY over, I started researching
alternative layouts. I had heard of Dvorak before, but my research led me to
believe that there are newer layouts that are better. Eventually, I was
deciding between Workman and Colemak Mod DH. I decided to go with Colemak
because it seemed to be the most popular and therefore had the most resources
available. It helped that most metrics I saw showed Colemak as being slightly
faster than Workman. I also decided to go with Mod DH because many people felt
it is more comfortable, at least on split columnar keyboards.

### Learning to touch type Colemak Mod DH

I started out by using [keybr.com](https://keybr.com/) to learn the layout.
This site is an amazing resource for learning to touch type. It has a very nice
UI and it's free. I used this site for about 2 months, until I had comfortably
progressed through all of the keys. I was typing at about 40 WPM at this point.
I then switched to [monkeytype.com](https://monkeytype.com/) simply because it
has a nicer UI and I liked the stats it provided. 

I would highly recommend switching to an alternative layout if you're going to
use an ergonomic keyboard. It's a great opportunity to learn to touch type and
it actually makes switching to standard keyboards easier (for example when
traveling and using a laptop). The context switch from an ergo split on Colemak
to a standard keyboard on QWERTY is much easier than switching from an ergo
split on QWERTY to a standard keyboard on QWERTY. I have to admit that my
QWERTY skills have suffered a bit, but I can still type at about 80 WPM on
QWERTY. I'm sure that number would go up if I was on a standard keyboard for a
few days.

### Summary

The Iris was a great first ergo keyboard. It was large enough that I didn't
have to cram too many keys onto alternate layers, but small enough that I could
still reach all of the keys. I used it many times for gaming and it worked
great. I would find myself revisiting it every now and then just to see how I
felt about it. I used it for about 3 months before I decided to try something
else. I was typing at about 50 WPM on it and I was very comfortable with the
layout.

## Corne

![Corne](/images/corne.jpg)

After using the Iris for a little over 3 months, I decided I wanted to try a
smaller keyboard. It felt that touch typing the number row was a bit awkward on
the Iris, and I saw many people in the community using 36 and 42 key keyboards.
I decided to go with the Corne because it was incredibly popular, looks great,
and I can get it fully wireless. I ordered the kit from [Little
Keyboards](https://littlekeyboards.com/collections/corne-keyboard) and got to
work.

The switches I went with were Boba U4Tx (Half-Silent Tactile) and I went with
the XDA keycaps this time.

I hadn't soldered anything since I was in high school (different story, but I
used to build chat adapters for Xbox 360 headsets to work on Xbox One using the
standard Xbox One headsets). I was a bit nervous, but I had watched a few
videos and gone over the documentation a few times. I was able to get it
soldered in about 4 hours. I was pretty proud of myself. Because I chose to go
with the wireless version, I had a hard time finding documentation for that
part of the build. I wish I had taken more notes, but I was able to get it
working great.

I used Nice!Nanos for the microcontrollers and flashed them with ZMK. I had
heard many good things about home row mods, so I decided to try them out. The
Miryoku keymap was a great starting point for me. I was able to get it flashed
and working in about 2 hours. I was typing on it shortly after.

I gave the home row mods a try for about 2 weeks. I really liked the idea of
them, but I found that I was making more mistakes than I was on the Iris. I
also found that I was having to think about the mods more than I wanted to. I
decided to stop using them and take advantage of the extra pinky keys.

Midway through my time with the Corne, I decided to try using my old OEM
profile keycaps from my original mechanical keyboard. I was surprised to find
that I actually liked them better than the DSA/XDA keycaps. I think this is
because I was able to feel the edges of the keys better and honestly probably
just years of muscle memory.

It was with the Corne that I really started to hit my stride with split
keyboards. I was typing at about 80 WPM at this point (5 months in), and had
been using splits full-time since getting the Corne. I was starting to develop
my own custom layout and began tailoring it to my workflow.

### Summary

I really enjoyed the Corne. It was a great keyboard and I loved the wireless
aspect. I used it for about 2 months before I decided to try something else. I
was typing at about 80 WPM on it and I was very comfortable with the layout.

## Lumberjack

![Lumberjack](/images/lumberjack.jpg)

The Lumberjack was one I was eyeing for months before I jumped on a group buy.
I was really attracted to the look of it. Coming from the Corne, I was excited
to have a number row again. I went all out on this one and made it (in my
opinion) look amazing. I went with a wood case and some Lord of the Rings
themed MT3 keycaps from Drop. For the switches, I went with the Boba U4Ts.

Soldering this kit was a bit more difficult than the Corne. It is completely
through-hole, so there are a lot more components to solder. I was able to get
it soldered in about 6 hours. Somehow, I managed to get it working on the first
try.

I love this keyboard. It's my favorite for looks. I used it as my daily driver
for about 5 months. I got my max typing speed on this keyboard (115WPM). I was
very comfortable with the layout and had fine-tuned my custom keymap. I was
using it for gaming and typing.

My only gripe with this keyboard is the thumb cluster. There are only 2 keys on
each side that my thumbs can comfortably reach. I'm most comfortable with 3
thumb keys on each side. I was able to make it work, but I was always thinking
about how I could make it better.

## Sofle v2 choc

![Soflev2](/images/soflev2.jpg)

My decision to buy the Sofle was a bit strange. I don't really intend to use it
in the long term. I bought it because I wanted to try out the choc switches. I
had heard good things about them and I wanted to see if I liked them better
than MX style switches. Ultimately, I would like to get a keyboard with a
keywell, either the [Kinesis Advantage 360]() (MX style switches) or the
[Glove80](). But without knowing if I would like the choc switches, I didn't
want to spend the money on either of those keyboards.

I bought the kit from [Little Keyboards]() and went with the Kailh Choc Whites.

I'm pretty comfortable soldering at this point, so I was able to get it
soldered in about 3 hours. I got it flashed with QMK and got to typing.

The choc whites were not my cup of tea. I found the activation point to be
inconsistent with the clicks, and I didn't like the feel of the click. After a
week, I had already ordered some Sunset Switches (Tactile). Those arrived after
another week and I swapped them out. I like these switches soooo much better.
They are very smooth and the bump is very nice. I'm not sure if I like them
better than the Boba U4Ts, but they are definitely in contention.

The thumb cluster on this keyboard is my favorite so far. It has 3 easily
reachable keys on each side.

I've been using this keyboard for 2 months now and I'm very comfortable with
it. I'm typing at about 100 WPM on it. I'm still using my custom keymap, and
I've gotten so much omre productive than I was a year ago.

## Conclusion

I'm very happy with my decision to try out ergonomic keyboards. I'm finally
touch typing and I'm typing faster than I ever have. I'm also much more
comfortable when typing. I don't think I'll ever go back to a standard
keyboard.

My next keyboard will probably be the [Glove80](). I'm very interested in
trying out a keywell and I have started to really like the choc switches. I
will probably go with the Sunset Switches (Tactile) again.

I hope you can excuse my rambling. I just wanted to get my thoughts down. I
intend to follow this up with more tailored posts about different aspects of my
keyboard journey. I'm thinking about doing a post on my custom keymap, and
maybe a post about my desktop environment/ tmux/nvim setup.
